+++
date = '2025-07-30T23:44:55+08:00'
draft = false
title = '0730学习笔记'

categories="memo"

tags=["gcc man"]

+++

## GCC manual-RTFM

今天心血来潮想要拜读`gcc`man page，学到很多。有时候会思考，AI确实帮助了我快速上手一个领域，比如使用Rust编写一个植物大战僵尸的游戏，比如从零开始认识一个代码，但是一旦结束之后，回头再想就很难说我仍然可以再举一反三地做另一个好玩的事情，事实上Rust的语法和特性我也几乎忘记。

jyy老师在课堂上曾经向我们展示了许多很好玩的代码，很有意思的命令行，也曾经嘱咐我们一定要RTFM(Read The Friendly Manual)，现在的我毕业了，同时仍然是AI的重度依赖者，只是心里一直有一个地方在不断的问自己：AI的回答能否坦然接受？

我的答案一直是：NO

我始终在拥抱AI的同时留有一丝怀疑和谨慎。

这是man page的部分内容，权当记录，明天还要更新更多的笔记。

```c
NAME      

       gcc - GNU project C and C++ compiler


       gcc [-c|-S|-E] [-std=standard]
           [-g] [-pg] [-Olevel]
           [-Wwarn...] [-Wpedantic]
           [-Idir...] [-Ldir...]
           [-Dmacro[=defn]...] [-Umacro]
           [-foption...] [-mmachine-option...]
           [-o outfile] [@file] infile...
    
       Only the most useful options are listed here; see below for the
       remainder.  g++ accepts mostly the same options as gcc.

DESCRIPTION      


       When you invoke GCC, it normally does preprocessing, compilation,
       assembly and linking.  The "overall options" allow you to stop
       this process at an intermediate stage.  For example, the -c option
       says not to run the linker.  Then the output consists of object
       files output by the assembler.
    
       Other options are passed on to one or more stages of processing.
       Some options control the preprocessor and others the compiler
       itself.  Yet other options control the assembler and linker; most
       of these are not documented here, since you rarely need to use any
       of them.
    
       Most of the command-line options that you can use with GCC are
       useful for C programs; when an option is only useful with another
       language (usually C++), the explanation says so explicitly.  If
       the description for a particular option does not mention a source
       language, you can use that option with all supported languages.
    
       The usual way to run GCC is to run the executable called gcc, or
       machine-gcc when cross-compiling, or machine-gcc-version to run a
       specific version of GCC.  When you compile C++ programs, you
       should invoke GCC as g++ instead.
    
       The gcc program accepts options and file names as operands.  Many
       options have multi-letter names; therefore multiple single-letter
       options may not be grouped: -dv is very different from -d -v.
    
       You can mix options and other arguments.  For the most part, the
       order you use doesn't matter.  Order does matter when you use
       several options of the same kind; for example, if you specify -L
       more than once, the directories are searched in the order
       specified.  Also, the placement of the -l option is significant.
    
       Many options have long names starting with -f or with -W---for
       example, -fmove-loop-invariants, -Wformat and so on.  Most of
       these have both positive and negative forms; the negative form of
       -ffoo is -fno-foo.  This manual documents only one of these two
       forms, whichever one is not the default.
    
       Some options take one or more arguments typically separated either
       by a space or by the equals sign (=) from the option name.  Unless
       documented otherwise, an argument can be either numeric or a
       string.  Numeric arguments must typically be small unsigned
       decimal or hexadecimal integers.  Hexadecimal arguments must begin
       with the 0x prefix.  Arguments to options that specify a size
       threshold of some sort may be arbitrarily large decimal or
       hexadecimal integers followed by a byte size suffix designating a
       multiple of bytes such as "kB" and "KiB" for kilobyte and
       kibibyte, respectively, "MB" and "MiB" for megabyte and mebibyte,
       "GB" and "GiB" for gigabyte and gigibyte, and so on.  Such
       arguments are designated by byte-size in the following text.
       Refer to the NIST, IEC, and other relevant national and
       international standards for the full listing and explanation of
       the binary and decimal byte size prefixes.

   Option Summary
       Here is a summary of all the options, grouped by type.
       Explanations are in the following sections.

       Overall Options
           -c  -S  -E  -o file  -x language -v  -###
           --help[=class[,...]]  --target-help  --version
           -pass-exit-codes  -pipe  -specs=file  -wrapper @file
           -ffile-prefix-map=old=new -fplugin=file  -fplugin-arg-name=arg
           -fdump-ada-spec[-slim]  -fada-spec-parent=unit
           -fdump-go-spec=file
    
       C Language Options
           -ansi  -std=standard  -fgnu89-inline
           -fpermitted-flt-eval-methods=standard -aux-info filename
           -fallow-parameterless-variadic-functions -fno-asm
           -fno-builtin  -fno-builtin-function  -fgimple -fhosted
           -ffreestanding -fopenacc  -fopenacc-dim=geom -fopenmp
           -fopenmp-simd -fms-extensions  -fplan9-extensions
           -fsso-struct=endianness -fallow-single-precision
           -fcond-mismatch  -flax-vector-conversions -fsigned-bitfields
           -fsigned-char -funsigned-bitfields  -funsigned-char
    
       C++ Language Options
           -fabi-version=n  -fno-access-control -faligned-new=n
           -fargs-in-order=n  -fchar8_t  -fcheck-new -fconstexpr-depth=n
           -fconstexpr-loop-limit=n -fconstexpr-ops-limit=n
           -fno-elide-constructors -fno-enforce-eh-specs
           -fno-gnu-keywords -fno-implicit-templates
           -fno-implicit-inline-templates -fno-implement-inlines
           -fms-extensions -fnew-inheriting-ctors -fnew-ttp-matching
           -fno-nonansi-builtins  -fnothrow-opt  -fno-operator-names
           -fno-optional-diags  -fpermissive -fno-pretty-templates -frepo
           -fno-rtti  -fsized-deallocation -ftemplate-backtrace-limit=n
           -ftemplate-depth=n -fno-threadsafe-statics  -fuse-cxa-atexit
           -fno-weak  -nostdinc++ -fvisibility-inlines-hidden
           -fvisibility-ms-compat -fext-numeric-literals -Wabi=n
           -Wabi-tag  -Wconversion-null  -Wctor-dtor-privacy
           -Wdelete-non-virtual-dtor  -Wdeprecated-copy
           -Wdeprecated-copy-dtor -Wliteral-suffix -Wmultiple-inheritance
           -Wno-init-list-lifetime -Wnamespaces  -Wnarrowing
           -Wpessimizing-move  -Wredundant-move -Wnoexcept
           -Wnoexcept-type  -Wclass-memaccess -Wnon-virtual-dtor
           -Wreorder  -Wregister -Weffc++  -Wstrict-null-sentinel
           -Wtemplates -Wno-non-template-friend  -Wold-style-cast
           -Woverloaded-virtual  -Wno-pmf-conversions
           -Wno-class-conversion  -Wno-terminate -Wsign-promo
           -Wvirtual-inheritance



       Preprocessor Options
           -Aquestion=answer -A-question[=answer] -C  -CC  -Dmacro[=defn]
           -dD  -dI  -dM  -dN  -dU -fdebug-cpp  -fdirectives-only
           -fdollars-in-identifiers -fexec-charset=charset
           -fextended-identifiers -finput-charset=charset
           -fmacro-prefix-map=old=new -fno-canonical-system-headers
           -fpch-deps  -fpch-preprocess -fpreprocessed  -ftabstop=width
           -ftrack-macro-expansion -fwide-exec-charset=charset
           -fworking-directory -H  -imacros file  -include file -M  -MD
           -MF  -MG  -MM  -MMD  -MP  -MQ  -MT -no-integrated-cpp  -P
           -pthread  -remap -traditional  -traditional-cpp  -trigraphs
           -Umacro  -undef -Wp,option  -Xpreprocessor option
    
       Assembler Options
           -Wa,option  -Xassembler option
    
       Linker Options
           object-file-name  -fuse-ld=linker  -llibrary -nostartfiles
           -nodefaultlibs  -nolibc  -nostdlib -e entry  --entry=entry
           -pie  -pthread  -r  -rdynamic -s  -static  -static-pie
           -static-libgcc  -static-libstdc++ -static-libasan
           -static-libtsan  -static-liblsan  -static-libubsan -shared
           -shared-libgcc  -symbolic -T script  -Wl,option  -Xlinker
           option -u symbol  -z keyword
    
       Directory Options
           -Bprefix  -Idir  -I- -idirafter dir -imacros file  -imultilib
           dir -iplugindir=dir  -iprefix file -iquote dir  -isysroot dir
           -isystem dir -iwithprefix dir  -iwithprefixbefore dir -Ldir
           -no-canonical-prefixes  --no-sysroot-suffix -nostdinc
           -nostdinc++  --sysroot=dir
    
       Code Generation Options
           -fcall-saved-reg  -fcall-used-reg -ffixed-reg  -fexceptions
           -fnon-call-exceptions  -fdelete-dead-exceptions
           -funwind-tables -fasynchronous-unwind-tables -fno-gnu-unique
           -finhibit-size-directive  -fno-common  -fno-ident
           -fpcc-struct-return  -fpic  -fPIC  -fpie  -fPIE  -fno-plt
           -fno-jump-tables -frecord-gcc-switches -freg-struct-return
           -fshort-enums  -fshort-wchar -fverbose-asm  -fpack-struct[=n]
           -fleading-underscore  -ftls-model=model
           -fstack-reuse=reuse_level -ftrampolines  -ftrapv  -fwrapv
           -fvisibility=[default|internal|hidden|protected]
           -fstrict-volatile-bitfields  -fsync-libcalls
    
      For any given input file, the file name suffix determines what
       kind of compilation is done:
    
       file.c
           C source code that must be preprocessed.
    
       file.i
           C source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.ii
           C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.m
           Objective-C source code.  Note that you must link with the
           libobjc library to make an Objective-C program work.
    
       file.mi
           Objective-C source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.mm
       file.M
           Objective-C++ source code.  Note that you must link with the
           libobjc library to make an Objective-C++ program work.  Note
           that .M refers to a literal capital M.
    
       file.mii
           Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.h
           C, C++, Objective-C or Objective-C++ header file to be turned
           into a precompiled header (default), or C, C++ header file to
           be turned into an Ada spec (via the -fdump-ada-spec switch).
    
       file.cc
       file.cp
       file.cxx
       file.cpp
       file.CPP
       file.c++
       file.C
           C++ source code that must be preprocessed.  Note that in .cxx,
           the last two letters must both be literally x.  Likewise, .C
           refers to a literal capital C.
    
       file.mm
       file.M
           Objective-C++ source code that must be preprocessed.
    
       file.mii
           Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.hh
       file.H
       file.hp
       file.hxx
       file.hpp
       file.HPP
       file.h++
       file.tcc
           C++ header file to be turned into a precompiled header or Ada
           spec.
    
       file.f
       file.for
       file.ftn
           Fixed form Fortran source code that should not be
           preprocessed.
    
       file.F
       file.FOR
       file.fpp
       file.FPP
       file.FTN
           Fixed form Fortran source code that must be preprocessed (with
           the traditional preprocessor).
    
       file.f90
       file.f95
       file.f03
       file.f08
           Free form Fortran source code that should not be preprocessed.
    
       file.F90
       file.F95
       file.F03
       file.F08
           Free form Fortran source code that must be preprocessed (with
           the traditional preprocessor).
    
       file.go
           Go source code.
    
       file.brig
           BRIG files (binary representation of HSAIL).
    
       file.d
           D source code.
    
       file.di
           D interface file.
    
       file.dd
           D documentation code (Ddoc).
    
       file.ads
           Ada source code file that contains a library unit declaration
           (a declaration of a package, subprogram, or generic, or a
           generic instantiation), or a library unit renaming declaration
           (a package, generic, or subprogram renaming declaration).
           Such files are also called specs.
    
       file.adb
           Ada source code file containing a library unit body (a
           subprogram or package body).  Such files are also called
           bodies.
    
       file.s
           Assembler code.
    
       file.S
       file.sx
           Assembler code that must be preprocessed.
    
       other
           An object file to be fed straight into linking.  Any file name
           with no recognized suffix is treated this way.
    
       You can specify the input language explicitly with the -x option:
    
       -x language
           Specify explicitly the language for the following input files
           (rather than letting the compiler choose a default based on
           the file name suffix).  This option applies to all following
           input files until the next -x option.  Possible values for
           language are:
    
                   c  c-header  cpp-output
                   c++  c++-header  c++-cpp-output
                   objective-c  objective-c-header  objective-c-cpp-output
                   objective-c++ objective-c++-header objective-c++-cpp-output
                   assembler  assembler-with-cpp
                   ada
                   d
                   f77  f77-cpp-input f95  f95-cpp-input
                   go
                   brig
    
       -x none
           Turn off any specification of a language, so that subsequent
           files are handled according to their file name suffixes (as
           they are if -x has not been used at all).
    
       If you only want some of the stages of compilation, you can use -x
       (or filename suffixes) to tell gcc where to start, and one of the
       options -c, -S, or -E to say where gcc is to stop.  Note that some
       combinations (for example, -x cpp-output -E) instruct gcc to do
       nothing at all.
    
       -c  Compile or assemble the source files, but do not link.  The
           linking stage simply is not done.  The ultimate output is in
           the form of an object file for each source file.
    
           By default, the object file name for a source file is made by
           replacing the suffix .c, .i, .s, etc., with .o.
    
           Unrecognized input files, not requiring compilation or
           assembly, are ignored.
    
       -S  Stop after the stage of compilation proper; do not assemble.
           The output is in the form of an assembler code file for each
           non-assembler input file specified.
    
           By default, the assembler file name for a source file is made
           by replacing the suffix .c, .i, etc., with .s.
    
           Input files that don't require compilation are ignored.
    
       -E  Stop after the preprocessing stage; do not run the compiler
           proper.  The output is in the form of preprocessed source
           code, which is sent to the standard output.
    
           Input files that don't require preprocessing are ignored.
    
       -o file
           Place output in file file.  This applies to whatever sort of
           output is being produced, whether it be an executable file, an
           object file, an assembler file or preprocessed C code.
    
           If -o is not specified, the default is to put an executable
           file in a.out, the object file for source.suffix in source.o,
           its assembler file in source.s, a precompiled header file in
           source.suffix.gch, and all preprocessed C source on standard
           output.
    
       -v  Print (on standard error output) the commands executed to run
           the stages of compilation.  Also print the version number of
           the compiler driver program and of the preprocessor and the
           compiler proper.
    
       -###
           Like -v except the commands are not executed and arguments are
           quoted unless they contain only alphanumeric characters or
           "./-_".  This is useful for shell scripts to capture the
           driver-generated command lines.
    
       --help
           Print (on the standard output) a description of the command-
           line options understood by gcc.  If the -v option is also
           specified then --help is also passed on to the various
           processes invoked by gcc, so that they can display the
           command-line options they accept.  If the -Wextra option has
           also been specified (prior to the --help option), then
           command-line options that have no documentation associated
           with them are also displayed.
    
       --target-help
           Print (on the standard output) a description of target-
           specific command-line options for each tool.  For some targets
           extra target-specific information may also be printed.
    
       --help={class|[^]qualifier}[,...]
           Print (on the standard output) a description of the command-
           line options understood by the compiler that fit into all
           specified classes and qualifiers.  These are the supported
           classes:
    
           optimizers
               Display all of the optimization options supported by the
               compiler.
    
           warnings
               Display all of the options controlling warning messages
               produced by the compiler.
    
           target
               Display target-specific options.  Unlike the --target-help
               option however, target-specific options of the linker and
               assembler are not displayed.  This is because those tools
               do not currently support the extended --help= syntax.
    
           params
               Display the values recognized by the --param option.
    
           language
               Display the options supported for language, where language
               is the name of one of the languages supported in this
               version of GCC.
    
           common
               Display the options that are common to all languages.
    
           These are the supported qualifiers:
    
           undocumented
               Display only those options that are undocumented.
    
           joined
               Display options taking an argument that appears after an
               equal sign in the same continuous piece of text, such as:
               --help=target.
    
           separate
               Display options taking an argument that appears as a
               separate word following the original option, such as: -o
               output-file.
    
           Thus for example to display all the undocumented target-
           specific switches supported by the compiler, use:
    
                   --help=target,undocumented
    
           The sense of a qualifier can be inverted by prefixing it with
           the ^ character, so for example to display all binary warning
           options (i.e., ones that are either on or off and that do not
           take an argument) that have a description, use:
    
                   --help=warnings,^joined,^undocumented
    
           The argument to --help= should not consist solely of inverted
           qualifiers.
    
           Combining several classes is possible, although this usually
           restricts the output so much that there is nothing to display.
           One case where it does work, however, is when one of the
           classes is target.  For example, to display all the target-
           specific optimization options, use:
    
                   --help=target,optimizers
    
           The --help= option can be repeated on the command line.  Each
           successive use displays its requested class of options,
           skipping those that have already been displayed.  If --help is
           also specified anywhere on the command line then this takes
           precedence over any --help= option.
    
           If the -Q option appears on the command line before the
           --help= option, then the descriptive text displayed by --help=
           is changed.  Instead of describing the displayed options, an
           indication is given as to whether the option is enabled,
           disabled or set to a specific value (assuming that the
           compiler knows this at the point where the --help= option is
           used).
    
           Here is a truncated example from the ARM port of gcc:
    
                     % gcc -Q -mabi=2 --help=target -c
                     The following options are target specific:
                     -mabi=                                2
                     -mabort-on-noreturn                   [disabled]
                     -mapcs                                [disabled]
    
           The output is sensitive to the effects of previous command-
           line options, so for example it is possible to find out which
           optimizations are enabled at -O2 by using:
    
                   -Q -O2 --help=optimizers
    
           Alternatively you can discover which binary optimizations are
           enabled by -O3 by using:
    
                   gcc -c -Q -O3 --help=optimizers > /tmp/O3-opts
                   gcc -c -Q -O2 --help=optimizers > /tmp/O2-opts
                   diff /tmp/O2-opts /tmp/O3-opts | grep enabled
    
       --version
           Display the version number and copyrights of the invoked GCC.
    
       -pass-exit-codes
           Normally the gcc program exits with the code of 1 if any phase
           of the compiler returns a non-success return code.  If you
           specify -pass-exit-codes, the gcc program instead returns with
           the numerically highest error produced by any phase returning
           an error indication.  The C, C++, and Fortran front ends
           return 4 if an internal compiler error is encountered.
    
       -pipe
           Use pipes rather than temporary files for communication
           between the various stages of compilation.  This fails to work
           on some systems where the assembler is unable to read from a
           pipe; but the GNU assembler has no trouble.
    
       -specs=file
           Process file after the compiler reads in the standard specs
           file, in order to override the defaults which the gcc driver
           program uses when determining what switches to pass to cc1,
           cc1plus, as, ld, etc.  More than one -specs=file can be
           specified on the command line, and they are processed in
           order, from left to right.
    
       -wrapper
           Invoke all subcommands under a wrapper program.  The name of
           the wrapper program and its parameters are passed as a comma
           separated list.
    
                   gcc -c t.c -wrapper gdb,--args
    
           This invokes all subprograms of gcc under gdb --args, thus the
           invocation of cc1 is gdb --args cc1 ....
    
       -ffile-prefix-map=old=new
           When compiling files residing in directory old, record any
           references to them in the result of the compilation as if the
           files resided in directory new instead.  Specifying this
           option is equivalent to specifying all the individual
           -f*-prefix-map options.  This can be used to make reproducible
           builds that are location independent.  See also
           -fmacro-prefix-map and -fdebug-prefix-map.
    
       -fplugin=name.so
           Load the plugin code in file name.so, assumed to be a shared
           object to be dlopen'd by the compiler.  The base name of the
           shared object file is used to identify the plugin for the
           purposes of argument parsing (See -fplugin-arg-name-key=value
           below).  Each plugin should define the callback functions
           specified in the Plugins API.
    
       -fplugin-arg-name-key=value
           Define an argument called key with a value of value for the
           plugin called name.
    
       -fdump-ada-spec[-slim]
           For C and C++ source and include files, generate corresponding
           Ada specs.
    
       -fada-spec-parent=unit
           In conjunction with -fdump-ada-spec[-slim] above, generate Ada
           specs as child units of parent unit.
    
       -fdump-go-spec=file
           For input files in any language, generate corresponding Go
           declarations in file.  This generates Go "const", "type",
           "var", and "func" declarations which may be a useful way to
           start writing a Go interface to code written in some other
           language.
    
       @file
           Read command-line options from file.  The options read are
           inserted in place of the original @file option.  If file does
           not exist, or cannot be read, then the option will be treated
           literally, and not removed.
    
           Options in file are separated by whitespace.  A whitespace
           character may be included in an option by surrounding the
           entire option in either single or double quotes.  Any
           character (including a backslash) may be included by prefixing
           the character to be included with a backslash.  The file may
           itself contain additional @file options; any such options will
           be processed recursively.


```

